Add a proposal for a new scheduler (#4921)
apache/openwhisk: proposals/POEM-2-function-pulling-container-scheduler.md

<!--
#
# Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
# contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
# this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
# The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
# (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
# the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
#
-->

# Title
Function Pulling Container Scheduler (FPCScheduler)

## Status

> * Current state: In-progress

Author: As more discussion is happening, I updated the state to `In-progress`.
The proposal would be officially in-progress as this PR gets merged.

* `FunctionPullingContainerProxy`: A proxy for a container. It repeatedly fetches activations and invokes them.
* `ActivationClientProxy`: The Akka-grpc client. It communicates with `ActivationServiceImpl` in schedulers.
* `InvokerHealthManager`: Manages the health and resources information of invokers. The data is stored in ETCD. If an invoker becomes unhealthy, it invokes health activations.

## Future work

#### Persistence

We reached a conclusion that the persistence of activation requests is not that mandatory requirement along with the at-most-once nature and circuit-breaking of OpenWhisk.
But if it is desired, we can implement a persistent queue rather than an in-memory queue.

#### Multiple partitions

Currently, a queue only has one partition. Since there can be multiple queues for each action, cluster-wide RPS(request per second) increases linearly.
If high RPS for one action is required, we can implement partitioning in queues to introduce parallel processing like what Kafka does.
But we already confirmed 100K RPS with 10 queues and 10 commodity invokers. And the performance would linearly increase with more invokers and queues.

## Integration and Migration plan

> Since they are all new components and can coexist with existing components using SPI(Service Provider Interface), there would be no breaking change.

Reviewer: I like the approach of keeping leveraging SPI

<!--
#
# Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
# contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
# this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
# The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
# (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
# the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
#
-->

# Title

> Function Pulling Container Scheduler(FPCScheduler)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Function Pulling Container Scheduler (FPCScheduler)
```

Reviewer 2: Small note: I'm not sure about this name - the existing scheduler is also a pull scheduler in that each invoker pulls from the kafka queue and schedules containers.

Author: Actually, what we tried to mean is a scheduler that schedules containers pulling functions.
So now each container pulls functions and scheduler just schedule such containers.
The existing scheduler schedules function requests. Currently, containers and function requests are identical in terms of scheduling. In my recognition, it just schedules function requests but the underlying implementation is just containers. 

But anyway it would be great if there is a better name for this intention.

Reviewer 3: Something like `Function Definition Container Scheduler` for what the existing scheduler is now becoming. Having pulling in the name can be confusing with that it's a part of the new method.  And then something like `Activation Polling` for the new queue pulling from within the containers.

## Status
* Current state: Draft
* Author(s): @style95, @ningyougang, @keonhee, @jiangpengcheng, @upgle

## Summary and Motivation

This POEM proposes a new scheduler for OpenWhisk, FPCScheduler.
Previously we revealed [performance issues](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/Autonomous+Container+Scheduling+v1) in OpenWhisk.
There are many reasons for them, but we can summarize them into the following problems.

1. Multiple actions share the same `homeInvoker`.

> 2. Current scheduler does not consider time taking for container operations(create/delete, pause/unpause).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Current scheduler does not consider the time taken for container operations (create/delete, pause/unpause).
```

3. Resources are evenly divided by the number of controllers.

First, multiple actions share the same `homeInvoker`. This is because the `homeInvoker` is statically decided by a hash function.
While scheduling, resource status in the invoker side is not considered and this introduces busy hotspot invokers while the others are idle.

> This is generally a good idea to increase the probability of container reuse, but it becomes bad in the real scene because of slow container operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is generally a good idea to increase the probability of container reuse, but it leads to performance degradation because of slow container operation.
```

Note the reason for the home invoker is to limit the impact of any one user for a fixed capacity system. That is, it reduces the number of invokers that any one user can monopolize. You are right however that there is a pathology where a queue of actions on the home invoker cannot be reallocated (no work stealing) when other invokers that are accessible to the same user in general become idle.

> When all resources in an invoker are taken by one action(busy/warm), an activation for another action will remove one of the existing containers and create a new one for it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When all resources in an invoker are taken by one action (busy/warm), an activation for another action will remove one of the existing containers and create a new one for it.
```

> If actions run for a long time this would be a good approach in terms of bin-packing. But when actions run for short time(most of the serverless cases),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If actions run for a long time this would be a good approach in terms of bin-packing. But when actions run for short time (most of the serverless cases),
```

Reviewer 2: it might be useful to provide a couple of references to back up the short duration - there are some studies from datadog and new relic that support the statement as examples.

> it severely increases the response time because container operations take one to two orders of magnitude longer time than invocation and it results in bad performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the heuristic severely increases the response time because container operations take one to two orders of magnitude longer time than invocation and this results in poor performance.
```

> Second, since controllers schedule activations to invokers in a distributed environment, controllers are assigned resource fraction of invokers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Second, since controllers schedule activations to invokers in a distributed environment, the invokers in the system are partitioned and assigned to specific controllers. This means that any one controller is assigned a fraction of the available resources in the system.
```

> It's not feasible to collect the status of invokers, scheduling decisions made by all controllers and schedule based on them in real time so that controllers schedule activations within their own partial invoker resources.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if I understood the point you're trying to make here. My interpretation is this:

```suggestion
It's not feasible to collect the status of all invokers so that scheduling decisions have a global view.
```

Author: What I intended is, for optimal scheduling, we need to collect the resource status of all invokers and consider all the decisions made by multiple controllers(because they can schedule to the same invoker), and all these procedures should be done in 2ms(real-time). With the fact that short-running functions can run for 1~2ms, it's not feasible to achieve optimal scheduling with a global view.

> As a result, controllers throttle activations even if cluster-wide invocations are less than limits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, controllers may throttle activations even if cluster-wide invocations are below limits (and when there are available resources and system capacity).
```

We propose FPCScheduler to address the above issues.

> The scheduler differs from the existing scheduler(`ShardingPoolBalancer`) in many directions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scheduler differs from the existing scheduler (`ShardingPoolBalancer`) in the following ways:
```

> It schedules containers rather than function requests. Each container is supposed to pull activations requests from the given action queue continuously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It schedules containers rather than function requests. Each container will pull activations requests from the given action queue continuously.
```

Reviewer 2: How do you secure the queue interfaces from inside the container?

Author: Actually, container proxies pull activation requests rather than the underlying containers.

> Whenever one execution is over, it fetches the next activation requests and invokes it repeatedly. In this way, we can maximize container reuse.

Reviewer 2: Is the container specific to a function+user?

Author: Containers belong to functions that are identified by the FQN(fully qualified name).
So different functions do not share the same container even if they are in the same namespace.

> Whenever one execution is over, it fetches the next activation requests and invokes it repeatedly. In this way, we can maximize container reuse.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Whenever one execution is over, it fetches the next activation requests and invokes it repeatedly. In this way, we can maximize container reuse.
```

> One more benefit is schedulers don't need to track/consider the location of existing containers. Schedulers just decide where and when to create more containers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An added benefit is that schedulers don't need to track or consider the location of existing containers. Schedulers decide where and when to create more containers.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this point. When/How is the decision to create more containers done?

Author: The scheduler component has multiple action queues.
Each action queue monitors its status such as the number of incoming requests, the number of requests in the queue, the number of requests that stayed in the queue for the given threshold(stale requests).
Based on this information, each queue decides the number of containers to be created.

There are many rules about this, but it generally works in this way:

1. If there is no container(when a queue is newly created), create one container immediately.
2. If there are stale requests in the queue which have stayed in the queue for some time without any processing, create more containers to handle them.
3. If there are more requests than the existing containers can handle, create more containers accordingly.

Reviewer 3: How do the container proxies that are pulling these activations off the queue coordinate between invokers to determine if more containers need to be created? Seems like a hard problem to get the optimal number of containers up to keep up with requests without over provisioning

Author: It uses the average `duration` for the given(configurable) interval. So that we can calculate the number of activations that one container can handle. Then we can add more containers according to the factors such as the number of incoming activations, the number of activations in the queue, the number of containers which are being created, and so on. It's based on heuristics and there can be some differences at any time as it's difficult to accurately predict the required number of containers like what you said. Also, it tends to a little bit over-provisioning containers but they work with a priority queue which is based on container IDs. So if there are not enough activations to keep all containers up, surplus containers are removed by natural selection.

> It can just create more containers in invokers with enough resources. And this enables distributed scheduling with all invoker resources among multiple schedulers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The scheduler can create more containers on invokers with enough resources. This enables distributed scheduling with all invoker resources among multiple schedulers.
```

> Controllers no longer schedule activation requests. They are in charge of creating action queues and forwarding activation requests to the queues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Controllers no longer schedule activation requests. Instead, controllers create action queues and forward activation requests to these queues.
```

> The action queue is a dedicated queue for the given action and dynamically created/deleted in schedulers. Each action has its own queue, so there is no interference among actions because of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each action queue is a dedicated queue for the given action and dynamically created/deleted by the FPCSchedulers. Each action has its own queue, so there is no interference among actions because of a shared queue.
```

Reviewer 2: Is the queue specific to a function name or name + namespace?

Author: The queue is uniquely identified by the FQN of the given action.
So `namespace + (package name)+ name`.

> a shared queue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ETCD, a distributed and reliable key-value store is used for a transaction, health-check, cluster information sharing, etc.

Reviewer 2: Provide a link to etcd?

Reviewer 2: Curious why etcd not redis?

Author: We wanted to take advantage of some features in ETCD such as lease + keepalive, transaction, etc.

> Each scheduler performs a transaction via ETCD when scheduling. The health status of each component(scheduler, invoker) is managed by [Lease](https://help.compose.com/docs/etcd-using-etcd3-features#leases) in ETCD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each scheduler performs a transaction via ETCD when scheduling. The health status of each component (scheduler, invoker) is managed by a [lease](https://help.compose.com/docs/etcd-using-etcd3-features#leases) in ETCD.
```

> Whenever a component is failed, it no longer sends keepalive requests, and its health data is removed by lease timeout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever a component is failed, it no longer sends keepalive requests, and its health data is removed via a lease timing out.
```

> Cluster-wide information such as scheduler endpoints, queue endpoints, containers in a namespace, and throttling is stored in ETCD and referred by corresponding components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cluster-wide information such as scheduler endpoints, queue endpoints, containers in a namespace, and throttling is stored in ETCD and referenced by corresponding components.
```

Controllers throttle namespaces based on the throttling data in ETCD. So all controllers share the same view against the resources and manage them in the same way.

One more benefit of having our own component for routing rather than utilizing open-source components such as Kafka is we can extend and implement any routing logic.
We would want various routing policies at some point. For example, when we utilize multiple versions of an action in-flight in the future we might want to control the traffic ratio between the two versions,
we can route activations only to invokers with a specific resource, we may want to have dedicated invokers for some namespaces and so on. And this POEM could be a baseline for such extensions.

> ## Proposed changes: Architecture Diagram (optional), and Design

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Proposed changes: Architecture Diagram (optional) and Design
```

> The design document along architecture diagram is already shared in [OpenWhisk Wiki](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/Apache+OpenWhisk+Project+Wiki?src=sidebar)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The design document along architecture diagram is already shared on the [OpenWhisk Wiki](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/Apache+OpenWhisk+Project+Wiki?src=sidebar)
```

* [Design Consideration](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/Design+consideration?src=contextnavpagetreemode)
* [Architecture](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/System+Architecture)
* [Component Design](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/Component+Design)

### Implementation details

> For the record, we(Naver) are already operating OpenWhisk with this scheduler in a production environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the record, we (Naver) are already operating OpenWhisk with this scheduler in a production environment.
```

* `EtcdClient`: An ETCD client offering basic CRUD operations.
* `DataManagementService`: In charge of storing/recovering data in ETCD. It internally utilizes `LeaseKeepAliveService`, and `WatcherService`.
* `LeaseKeepAliveService`: In charge of keeping the given lease alive.
* `WatcherService`: Watches the given keys and receives events for the keys.

#### Scheduler components

In an abstract view, schedulers provide queueing, container scheduling, and activation routing.

* `QueueManager`: The main entry point for queue creation request. It has references to all queues.
* `MemoryQueue`: Dynamically created/deleted for each action. It watches the incoming/outgoing requests and triggers container creation.
* `ContainerManager`: Schedule container creation requests to appropriate invokers.
* `ActivationServiceImpl`: Provide API for containers to fetch activations via Akka-grpc. It works in a long-poll way to avoid busy-waiting.

#### Controller components
* `FPCPoolBalancer`: Create queues if not exist, and forward messages to them.
* `FPCEntitlementProvider`: Throttle activations based on throttling information in ETCD.

> #### Invoker components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Invoker components
```

* `FunctionPullingContainerPool`: A container pool for function pulling container. It handles the container creation requests.
* `FunctionPullingContainerProxy`: A proxy for a container. It repeatedly fetches activations and invokes them.
* `ActivationClientProxy`: The Akka-grpc client. It communicates with `ActivationServiceImpl` in schedulers.
* `InvokerHealthManager`: Manages the health and resources information of invokers. The data is stored in ETCD. If an invoker becomes unhealthy, it invokes health activations.

> ## Future work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Future work
```

#### Persistence

We reached a conclusion that the persistence of activation requests is not that mandatory requirement along with the at-most-once nature and circuit-breaking of OpenWhisk.

> But if it is desired, we can implement a persistent queue rather than an in-memory queue.

Reviewer 2: I think the at most once policy was a mistake. I am of the opinion that at least once is superior in practice.

Author: Then how do you think about activations requiring transactional supports?
For example, if an action updates data in DB, it can cause multiple updates with at least once semantic.
Do you keep transactional support in your mind as well?

#### Multiple partitions

> Currently, a queue only has one partition. Since there can be multiple queues for each action, cluster-wide RPS(request per second) linearly increases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, a queue only has one partition. Since there can be multiple queues for each action, cluster-wide RPS (request per second) increases linearly.
```

> If high RPS for one action is required, we can implement partitioning in queues to introduce parallel processing like what Kafka does.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the reference to Kafka here.

Author: Partitions are the unit of parallelism in Kafka.
So if we want multiple consumers running, we need at least the same number of partitions.

In our current implementation, each queue has only one partition(no partition). So the performance can be limited by the performance of one queue. Generally, it would be enough for most of cases, but as the scale of cluster grows, multiple partitions may be desired in the huge scale.

Reviewer 3: Is there any idea what the new queues will look like? Seems like overkill to be implementing partitioned queues when there's existing queues out there like kafka that will do this. I get that you just want in mem though so using kafka would be overkill

Author: The partitioning is future work. This feature would not be included in my proposal at this time.
And I think the version in this proposal would be enough for most cases.

If you are mentioning about the new queue which is introduced by my proposal, you may find this useful: [2.5 Rule out Kafka](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/OPENWHISK/Design+consideration).
In short, I introduced a new queue for better controllability, and routing.

But we already confirmed 100K RPS with 10 queues and 10 commodity invokers. And the performance would linearly increase with more invokers and queues.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
